.\" =============================================================================
.\" wt.1 — man page for wt, the Git Worktree Manager
.\" Process with: groff -man -Tutf8 wt.1 | less
.\" Install to:   /usr/local/share/man/man1/wt.1
.\" =============================================================================
.TH WT 1 "2025" "wt 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.
.\" ── String definitions ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.\" Worktree base path, relative to the repo root.
.\" Change this one line if the path ever changes.
.ds WT_PATH .git/worktrees
.ds WT_INIT wt.init.sh
.
.\" ── NAME ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH NAME
wt \- ergonomic Git worktree manager
.
.\" ── SYNOPSIS ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY wt
.B add
.I branch
.YS
.SY wt
.B rm
.RI [ branch ]
.YS
.SY wt
.B prune
.YS
.SY wt
.B ls
.YS
.SY wt
.B mv
.I from-branch
.I to-branch
.YS
.SY wt
.B co
.I branch
.YS
.SY wt
.B install
.YS
.SY wt
.BR help | \-h | \-\-help
.YS
.SY wt
.BR version | \-\-version
.YS
.
.\" ── DESCRIPTION ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wt
is a thin, opinionated wrapper around
.BR "git worktree" (1)
that provides a consistent directory layout, automatic navigation, and
branch auto-creation.
.PP
All managed worktrees are placed under
.I \*[WT_PATH]/
inside the repository root, named after the repository and branch:
.PP
.RS
.I <repo-root>/\*[WT_PATH]/<repo-name>.<sanitized-branch>
.RE
.PP
Because shell scripts run in a subshell and cannot change the parent
shell's working directory,
.B wt
uses a two-layer architecture: the binary emits a
.B __WT_CD__:/path
token on standard output when a directory change is needed; a companion
shell function (see
.BR \*[WT_INIT] )
intercepts it and performs the
.BR cd (1)
in the actual shell session.
Run
.B wt install
once to set this up.
.
.\" ── COMMANDS ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH COMMANDS
.
.TP
.BI "wt add " branch
Create a new managed worktree for
.IR branch .
If
.I branch
does not exist locally it is created with
.BR "git worktree add \-b" .
The
.I \*[WT_PATH]/
directory is created if it does not already exist.
After the worktree is ready, the shell navigates into it automatically
(requires shell integration).
.IP
.B Guards:
Fails if the worktree directory already exists (use
.B wt co
to visit it), or if the branch is already checked out in another
worktree.
.
.TP
.BI "wt rm " "[branch]"
Remove a managed worktree.
.RS
.TP
.B wt rm
Remove the worktree you are currently inside.
.TP
.BI "wt rm " branch
Remove the worktree for
.IR branch .
.RE
.IP
If you are inside the worktree being removed, the shell navigates to the
repository root first.
If the worktree has uncommitted changes,
.B wt rm
retries with
.B \-\-force
and prints a warning.
The underlying branch is
.I not
deleted; use
.B git branch \-d
separately.
.
.TP
.B wt prune
Remove stale git administrative records left behind when worktree
directories were deleted manually.
Wraps
.BR "git worktree prune \-\-verbose" .
If you are inside any managed worktree, the shell navigates to the
repository root first (git requires this).
.
.TP
.B wt ls
Print all worktrees in a formatted table showing path, abbreviated
commit hash, and branch name.
The worktree you are currently inside is marked with a
.B \(bu
indicator.
A summary line at the bottom shows the count of managed worktrees and
the repository root.
.
.TP
.BI "wt mv " "from-branch to-branch"
Move (rename) the managed worktree for
.I from-branch
to the path corresponding to
.IR to-branch ,
updating git's internal tracking via
.BR "git worktree move" .
.IP
If you were inside the renamed worktree, the shell navigates to the
equivalent location in the new path (subdirectory position is
preserved).
.IP
Note: this renames the
.I directory
only. To rename the branch as well, run
.B "git branch \-m"
.I from-branch
.I to-branch
afterwards.
.
.TP
.BI "wt co " branch
Change the shell's working directory to the managed worktree for
.IR branch .
The branch must already have a worktree; use
.B wt add
to create one.
Requires shell integration.
.
.TP
.B wt install
Locate
.B \*[WT_INIT]
and append a
.B source
line for it to
.B ~/.bashrc
and/or
.B ${ZDOTDIR:-~}/.zshrc
(whichever exist).
Skips files that already contain the line.
Prints the exact
.B source
command to run immediately without restarting the shell.
.IP
.B \*[WT_INIT]
is expected at
.I ../lib/\*[WT_INIT]
relative to the
.B wt
binary.
With the recommended layout this resolves to
.IR ~/.local/lib/wt.init.sh .
.
.TP
.BR "wt help" ", " "wt \-h" ", " "wt \-\-help"
Print a compact reference to standard output.
.
.TP
.BR "wt version" ", " "wt \-\-version"
Print the version string.
.
.\" ── DIRECTORY LAYOUT ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH DIRECTORY LAYOUT
.TP
.I <repo-root>/\*[WT_PATH]/
Base directory for all managed worktrees.
Because this path lives inside
.IR .git/ ,
it is automatically excluded from git tracking and does not require a
.I .gitignore
entry.
.TP
.I <repo-root>/\*[WT_PATH]/<repo-name>.<sanitized-branch>
Worktree directory for a given branch.
.PP
Branch names are sanitized before use as directory components:
.TS
l l.
Character	Replacement
/	\-
space	_
.TE
.PP
Examples:
.TS
l l.
Branch	Directory suffix
main	.main
feature/auth	.feature-auth
bugfix\-123	.bugfix-123
chore/upgrade deps	.chore-upgrade_deps
.TE
.
.\" ── SHELL INTEGRATION ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH SHELL INTEGRATION
Shell scripts run in a subshell; any
.B cd
executed there is discarded when the script exits.
.B wt
solves this by printing a sentinel token on standard output:
.PP
.RS
.B __WT_CD__:/path/to/destination
.RE
.PP
The
.B wt
shell function defined in
.B \*[WT_INIT]
captures all output from the binary, strips this token, and performs the
.BR cd (1)
in the current shell process.
Commands that do not trigger navigation pass output through unchanged.
.PP
Because the binary's stdout is redirected to a temporary file during
capture,
.BR "[ -t 1 ]"
is always false inside the binary. The shell function therefore sets
.B WT_COLOR=1
when its own stdout is a terminal, preserving colour output.
.PP
.B \*[WT_INIT]
locates the
.B wt
binary by checking
.I ../bin/wt
relative to itself, then
.IR /usr/local/bin/wt ,
then
.IR ~/.local/bin/wt .
.PP
To install, run
.B wt install
and reload your shell, or manually add to your rc file:
.PP
.RS
.EX
source "/path/to/\*[WT_INIT]"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Verify the function is active:
.PP
.RS
.EX
type wt    # should print: wt is a function
.EE
.RE
.
.\" ── ENVIRONMENT ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WT_COLOR
Set to
.B 1
by the shell function when its stdout is a terminal, so the binary
emits colour output even though its own stdout is a temp file.
Set to
.B 0
to suppress colour unconditionally.
.TP
.B ZDOTDIR
If set, the zsh rc file is resolved as
.I $ZDOTDIR/.zshrc
rather than
.IR ~/.zshrc .
.
.\" ── EXAMPLES ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH EXAMPLES
Start work on a new feature:
.PP
.RS
.EX
wt add feature/payment-api
.EE
.RE
.PP
Review a pull request in an isolated directory:
.PP
.RS
.EX
git fetch origin
wt add pr-review/42
# ... review and test ...
wt rm pr-review/42
.EE
.RE
.PP
Navigate between open worktrees:
.PP
.RS
.EX
wt ls
wt co feature/auth
wt co bugfix-123
.EE
.RE
.PP
Clean up after a merge:
.PP
.RS
.EX
wt rm feature/payment-api
git branch -d feature/payment-api
wt prune
.EE
.RE
.PP
Rename a worktree mid-flight:
.PP
.RS
.EX
wt mv old-name new-name
.EE
.RE
.
.\" ── FILES ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.bashrc
.TQ
.I ${ZDOTDIR:-~}/.zshrc
Modified by
.B wt install
to source
.IR \*[WT_INIT] .
.TP
.I <repo-root>/\*[WT_PATH]/
Base directory for managed worktrees.
Lives inside
.I .git/
and is therefore never tracked by git.
.TP
.I \*[WT_INIT]
Shell function wrapper.
Must be
.I sourced
(not executed) in the current shell for directory navigation to work.
Located at
.I ../lib/\*[WT_INIT]
relative to the
.B wt
binary.
.
.\" ── EXIT STATUS ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (invalid arguments, git failure, missing worktree,
etc.). An error message is printed to standard error.
.
.\" ── DIAGNOSTICS ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B Not inside a git repository
The current directory (or any parent) is not a git repository.
.TP
.BI "Branch '" branch "' is already checked out in another worktree"
Git does not allow the same branch in two worktrees simultaneously.
Remove or move the other worktree first.
.TP
.BI "No worktree found at: " path
The computed path does not exist. Run
.B wt ls
to see registered worktrees, or run
.B wt prune
if a stale entry remains.
.TP
.B Worktree has local changes \(em forcing removal
The worktree contained uncommitted changes.
.B wt rm
retried with
.BR \-\-force .
Changes are permanently lost.
.TP
.B wt.init.sh not found. Expected: \fIpath\fP
.B wt install
could not locate
.B \*[WT_INIT]
at the expected path relative to the binary.
Ensure
.B \*[WT_INIT]
is at
.I ../lib/\*[WT_INIT]
relative to the
.B wt
binary (e.g.\&
.IR ~/.local/lib/wt.init.sh ).
.TP
.B wt: binary not found
The shell function in
.B \*[WT_INIT]
could not locate the
.B wt
binary.
.B \*[WT_INIT]
searches for
.B wt
at
.IR ../bin/wt
(relative to itself), then
.IR /usr/local/bin/wt ,
then
.IR ~/.local/bin/wt .
Ensure one of these paths is valid.
.
.\" ── SEE ALSO ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git-worktree (1),
.BR git-branch (1),
.BR git-checkout (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.
.\" ── AUTHORS ──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH AUTHORS
Written with the help of Claude (Anthropic).
.
.\" ── BUGS ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
.SH BUGS
.IP \(bu 2
Remote-tracking branches (e.g.\&
.BR origin/feature/foo )
produce detached HEAD worktrees.
Create a local tracking branch first:
.EX
git checkout \-b feature/foo origin/feature/foo
wt add feature/foo
.EE
.IP \(bu 2
Branch sanitization is one-way: two distinct branches can map to the
same directory name (e.g.\&
.B a/b
and
.BR a\-b ).
.B wt add
will fail on the second with a "directory already exists" error.
.IP \(bu 2
.B export \-f wt
in
.B \*[WT_INIT]
exports the function to bash subshells only; zsh does not inherit
exported shell functions.
